Remember the presidential election back in 1996 when Bob Dole was defeated by Bill Clinton?
Afterwards, Dole made a commercial mocking himself, claiming, “I just can’t win.”
Hillary Clinton must be feeling the same way.
The difference is that nobody feels bad for the career criminal.
Donations to the corrupt Clinton Foundation have plummeted by 37%…
From Breitbart:
Donations to the Clinton Foundation tanked in 2015 amid allegations that Hillary Clinton used the billion-dollar charity to siphon seven-figure donations from foreign governments and corporations, who received favorable government actions while Clinton was Secretary of State.
The Clinton’s troubled charity received $108 million in donations in 2015, down from a $172 million haul in 2014, according to the organization’s tax records.
The Clinton’s seven-figure speech income collapsed, too, from $3.6 million in 2014 to $357,500 in 2015, the New York Post reports.
Allegations of corruption at the Clinton Foundation—first reported by Breitbart News Editor-at-Large, Clinton Cash author, and Government Accountability Institute president Peter Schweizer—spurred more than a year of headlines and hard questions for Hillary Clinton and her presidential campaign.
As Clinton was set to announce her White House bid, the New York Times published a 4,000 word exposé detailing specifically how in 2010 then-Secretary of State Hillary Clinton approved the sale and transfer of 20 percent of U.S. uranium output to the Russian government.
As Clinton Cash documents in great detail, Clinton’s State Department was one of eight agencies to review the deal—but Hillary Clinton was the only agency head whose family foundation received $145 million in donations from people connected to the sale, as reported by the New York Times.
The Russian uranium deal was one of many instances where money flowed into the Clinton Foundation and favorable transactions followed to the benefit of the donor.
Indeed, thanks to a trove of hacked documents, produced by the WikiLeaks probe of John Podesta’s emails, the Clinton campaign was panicking in May 2015 over the potential fallout from the allegations found in Clinton Cash.
So sad…NOT! (Borat voice.)
Looks like people have finally caught on to the Clinton scam.
You’d think.
