The choice offered voters in today's American presidential election might give Britons cause to thank their parliamentary style of government. The debates in the House of Commons provide what James Madison called refinement, a system which exposes the faults of unworthy candidates. And refinement is not a word that comes to mind as one surveys the nominees of the Democratic and Republican Parties.
But then there are better things than refinement. One of these is the Cromwellian vigour required to dispatch a complacent and corrupt establishment, and that is what Donald Trump's supporters see in him. Amid the personal attacks of a bitter campaign, what has been forgotten are the issues that propelled him to victory in the Republican primaries, with more votes than any past victor. For there were two issues that brought voters to the polls, and will do so again next Tuesday: first, the decline of social mobility and the rise of a New Class of aristocrats; and second, political corruption.
Donald Trump: Hillary Clinton is terrible example for the children of this countryPlay!00:42
Americans like to think that theirs is the land of opportunity, the country where anyone can get ahead, wherever one is from. That’s the American Dream. But in George Carlin’s bitter jest, it’s called the American Dream because you have to be asleep to believe in it. The ladder of opportunity has been rolled up and we’ve become as immobile as the UK, and far less mobile than the Nordic countries or my native Canada. Pollsters tell us that, for the first time, Americans no longer believe that their children will be as well off as they are, and that’s really all you need to know to understand the Trump phenomenon. 
A meritocratic New Class has installed itself on top of American society. Its members aren’t the much-maligned top one percent so much as the top ten percent, the lawyers, lobbyists, and academics, the keeners who knew how to play the game, who networked in Grade School, who lived right and thought Left, and who used every angle to ensure that their children would have it as good as they did. 

At the bottom of the ladder are the lowest ten percent, mired in misfortune, who pass on their poverty to their children. Mitt Romney called them “takers,” people who take from society without adding much to it. In 2012, Romney offered voters a 59-point plan of right-wing ideology, while Obama conveyed the message that he had their back. And Obama won. Obama’s promise might have been hollow, but at least he didn’t seem heartless.
It is the common fate of nearly every presidential country to slip into one-person rule, and America under Obama is already very close to this
The people Trump defeated in the Republican primaries were all in the Romney mould, people who preached a perfect fidelity to right-wing principles but conveyed an indifference to people in the bottom 90 percent. By contrast, Trump’s policies resonated with those left behind in the economy and spoke to social and economic immobility, of an Immigration Act that imports immobility, of broken schools that reward teachers and punish students, of crony capitalism in Washington. These should have been Republican issues, but Republicans had largely ignored them. Cretinism doesn’t descend any lower.


If Trump’s style might seem Cromwellian, his agenda is legislative, and the man who wrote The Art of the Deal could be expected to reach across the aisle to enact needed legislation. By contrast, Mrs Clinton has a Supreme Court agenda, and would seek to appoint justices who would permit her to rule by executive ukase. It is the common fate of nearly every presidential country to slip into one-person rule, and America under Obama is already very close to this. The imperious Mrs Clinton would take it a broad step farther.

Then there’s corruption, the silent killer of an economy. Were the Clinton Cash machine to move into the White House, happy days would be here again for every Democratic lobbyist and donor. As Secretary of State, Mrs Clinton was a conspicuous failure in every respect save one: she made her family very, very wealthy. And she’d do the same from the courtier class of bankers and corporate executives. In today’s America, high finance and big business must partner with Washington, and woe to those who forget this. The person with a mean streak who described Trump supporters as a “basket of deplorables,”the person with a Nixon-sized enemies list, would know just what to do. For my friends, everything; for my enemies, the law!
Trump knows how the game is played, for he was a player. But he has decried the role of money in politics and has vowed to close the revolving door between Congress and K Street lobbyists and shut down the tax loopholes. And if he’s exploited every legal tax break he could, so what? That was FDR’s answer to critics when he appointed Joseph Kennedy to head up the Securities and Exchange Commission: “it takes one to catch one.”

